---
title: Project 4 - TBD
permalink: /project-4
---
## COS 460/540 - Computer Networks
# Project 4: TBD

## Specification

** This project has not yet been released **

<!--more-->

## Additional Information
* The server must accept as a configurable parameter (on the command line) the port number to listen on.
* You must include the file named PLAYBOOK.md
* PLAYBOOK.md has Your name
* PLAYBOOK.md has what language you used
* PLAYBOOK.md has a brief synopsis of your experience with the assignment (1-3 paragraphs).
* PLAYBOOK.md has how to compile and execute your project.
* You must not include any executable binary files. Submit only code.
* You may include a script or batch file to compile and/or run your server. This must be documented in your PLAYBOOK.md if it is included.
* You must submit your project through [GitHub](http://github.com)

## Definitions
The IETF Best Practice Document RFC 2119 Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels defines several keywords that are used in this assignment and throughout the course. Pay special attention to where they appear in the assignment.

Some keywords used in this assignment are as follows;

**MUST**: This word, or the terms **REQUIRED** or **SHALL**, mean that the definition is an absolute requirement of the specification.

**SHOULD**: This word, or the adjective **RECOMMENDED**, mean that there may exist valid reasons in particular circumstances to ignore a particular item, but the full implications must be under.

**MAY**: This word, or the adjective **OPTIONAL**, mean that an item is truly optional. One vendor may choose to include the item because a particular marketplace requires it or because the vendor feels that it enhances the product while another vendor may omit the same item.
